---
date: "2017-08-25"
title: "Qualities of the Servant Leader"
description: "Why some of the most impactful leaders fight for seats in the back of the room."
---

# Qualities of the Servant Leader

## Selflessness
Bouts of self-aggrandizement may be standard fare for (*white male*) [VC partners](#ellen-pow), but are absolutely toxic to the servant leader's mentality.  I recently saw the morale of a project management team fall to pieces when a star from another department joined the team, only to overhear a PM brag it was mostly his advocacy that got her the job.  Thus in a a single arrogant outburst the team's cohesiveness was decimated, along with the boastful PM's chances of earning recognition as a leader on the team.  The lesson?  

Selflessness must be demonstrated in both word and deed.  A workplace where individuals spar for recognition over accomplishments is not a safe workplace.  John Dame writes in [The Four Keys to Being a Trusted Leader](#): 
	"What safe is, is a place where people come to work not worried about whether they will have a job tomorrow, where compensation is fair, where employees feel they have gotten a little bit better at their job every day, where they feel there is opportunity to advance and learn, and where their bosses treat them like they are important contributors to the betterment of the organization.  Safe makes a great company."

## Patience.
Crafting a deliberate strategy for conscientious management pays off in new management roles -- but will momentum evaporate once quick wins are captured and the path becomes trickier to navigate?  Will your strategy survive a round of layoffs or the turnover of executive talent?  *Wanting* to serve your team won't go far enough;  nor cheerleading. Your strategy must connect to a coherent vision for how your team advances long-term goals of the organization.  As visionary, the servant leader communicates the mission, values and beliefs informing the organization's aspirations.  It must be transparent how your direction aligns with the grand agenda.  It is only once the vision is clarified and shared that the servant leader can truly serve the needs of their team.  http://www.appleseeds.org/Blanchard_Serv-Lead.htm

Building a vision requires patience.  As your ability to speak to your vision improves, so does a team's ability to comprehend it.  Service leadership is by definition a subtle practice: those around you will shift from reactive to proactive on their timelines, not your own.  According to Max Dupree, author of *Leadership as an Art*, "When it comes to vision and values, you have to say it over and over and over again until people get it right." If your peers aren't adapting the servant leader mindset, let go of the inclination to judge them and ask how you can help them achieve their goals.  

Second-order attributes such as interpersonal relationships and a culture of optimism also take time to grow.  Call attention to these attributes when appropriate and guide your team to develop an appreciation that is independent from your perspective.  Wait for them to come to you to talk about emergent properties of team or workplace culture, and be prepared to seek their opinions and challenge your own understanding when they do.

## Empathy
Servant leaders expect the best from their teams, a trait they demonstrate in a unique way: they *assume* those around them have good reasons for acting how they do, even when the specific reasons are not known.  If an employee's motives or performance come under attack, for example in an emergency triage meeting, the servant leaders backs up thier employee by taking responsibility for the issue and instilling confidence that a resolution will quickly follow.  Having avoided making excuses or casting blame in the meeting, the servant leader follows up with the employee in a calm environment where there is time and space to fully divulge the issue at hand.  The servant leader explains why the issue is personally important to them; asks questions earnestly; removes judgments or negative appraisals from the discussion; recognizes where the employee stands on the maturity or experience curve; and works harmoniously with the employee to outline a positive solution that helps them move forward.

 "Adopting the servant philosophy should also make it easier to provide corrective feedback. You are merely a facilitator, and facilitators aren’t angry, frustrated, or resentful when they deliver feedback, because it isn’t about them—it’s about the relationship between the two other parties. For that reason, exercising the servant frame of mind makes development conversations feel less personal. You aren’t disappointed in your employee’s actions; you are simply explaining how they get in the way of what he’s trying to accomplish for himself and the organization. When your only agenda is setting someone else up for success, your words tend to be received more openly. True upset happens when either party’s interests are allowed to suffer over time without intervention. It must be the manager’s primary concern to balance those interests." [Source](https://hbr.org/2015/09/new-managers-need-a-philosophy-about-how-theyll-lead?referral=03758&cm_vc=rr_item_page.top_right)

Feelings are important.

“It begins with the natural feeling that one wants to serve, to serve first,” Greenleaf wrote. “Then conscious choice brings one to aspire to lead.”

[PAO](https://www.thecut.com/2017/08/ellen-pao-silicon-valley-sexism-reset-excerpt.html)

Servant leaders expect the best from their teams, a trait they demonstrate in a unique way: they *assume* those around them have good reasons for acting how they do, even when the specific reasons are not known.  If an employee's motives or performance come under attack, for example in an emergency triage meeting, the servant leaders backs up thier employee by taking responsibility for the issue and instilling confidence that a resolution will quickly follow.  Having avoided making excuses or casting blame in the meeting, the servant leader follows up with the employee in a calm environment where there is time and space to fully divulge the issue at hand.  The servant leader explains why the issue is personally important to them; asks questions earnestly; removes judgments or negative appraisals from the discussion; recognizes where the employee stands on the maturity or experience curve; and works harmoniously with the employee to outline a positive solution that helps them move forward.